just to let you know that this video is
sponsored by the great courses plus
welcome everybody to this month tonight
sky news with me astrophysicist
dr becky smith i am going to be taking
you through all the things to look out
for in the night sky
in the coming months and all the things
that have been happening in space news
in the past month time stamps are in the
description if you want to skip ahead to
anything
as are all the links to the research
papers that i'm going to talk about all
right
without further ado let's get into this
and start by looking up
now although we've had what feels like
an endless heat wave here in the uk
which has been horrendous because we all
live in brick houses that are designed
to retain heat
with no air conditioning and we're all
working from home i looked like
monica by the end of the work day it's
the humidity
despite that though we are actually
getting towards the changing of
the seasons and that is being reflected
in our night sky so orion which is
famously a winter constellation
is starting to rise again in the early
morning sky just before dawn
in the east plus venus is going to be
near it too which means
one of my favorite constellations in
orion is pairing up with one of my
favorite planets to spot
in the sky so i'm really looking forward
to that view
i guess at least if i'm up early enough
to see it now towards the end of august
we've got a three-quarter moon pairing
up with
jupiter and saturn on the bank holiday
weekend of the 28th and 29th
of august on the friday the 28th the
moon will be closest to
jupiter which will be so the brightest
thing near the moon in the sky
and then on the 29th it will be closer
to saturn which is a little bit harder
to find
it's a little yellowish in color
compared to jupiter and not as bright
but
having the moon there should make it
easier to spot if you're trying to take
a photo or you're breaking out
binoculars or telescope it'll make it
much easier to know where to look then
on the 5th of september the moon will be
just past full and pairing up with mars
they're going to rise together in the
east and move together all across the
sky throughout the night before they set
in the west together in the early
morning before dawn
again it's just a really great way to
spot mars if you don't know what you're
looking for because it would be so close
to the moon
it will look reddish as well obviously
the red planet
and you know you'll just know which
direction now to send
a wave in towards perseverance on its
journey to mars but
more on that later then on september
14th we've got my
favorite pairing again the moon is back
looking like a toenail and it'll be near
to venus right before
dawn in the eastern sky how i have
missed
saying that you guys know i love a
toenail moon so if you capture
any images of any other things i've
talked about this month or still
capturing any of the purses meteor
shower
send them my way i'd always love to see
them all right now it's time to move on
to space news in the past month
so a few quick things before we dive
into the
really good stuff so you will have seen
hopefully on the mainstream
news that spacex's dragon craft safely
returned the astronauts bob benkin and
doug haley from the international space
station which is
great news because you know it's proof
of concept that spacex can do this for
nasa now
leaving nasa free to you know do the
stuff that we
haven't done before like luna bases and
missions to mars and speaking of
missions to mars
we also saw the successful launch of
nasa's new mars
rover perseverance or percy as the astro
community has dubbed it which i
love it's just so cute it hurts
it will arrive on mars in february 2021
and its main mission is to collect rock
samples that we
will eventually return to earth and
hopefully the idea is that we will be
able to test them
for any extinct or current life on mars
very low probability but we still got to
go and do
the experiment also on board though is
this sort of drone
helicopter thing which is being sent as
a proof of technology you know we
know that drones work on earth seems
that every sort of ten-year-old on the
street seems to own a drone these days
but in mars very thin atmosphere we need
to prove that
we can actually fly this thing and the
hope is that if this does work then what
this drone can do is sort of
scope out the best path for percy to
rove around mars slightly further away
from home now and
beetlejuice is dimming again
it's driving me insane just just pick a
brightness
beetlejuice seriously now it's not
dropped to the sort of unprecedented
levels of brightness that we saw back in
january that i covered in january's
night sky news
but there's still time yet so we'll keep
watch on it now there's no
sort of agreed upon hypothesis yet for
what's causing
this dimming it could be the sort of
giant star spots that i talked about
last week
as part of an instagram story tie into
night sky news
it could be dust no one really knows but
essentially more observations will help
and the fact that it's dimming again
should help as well so we'll keep
watching it and if anything changes
maybe i'll have more news for you
next month and i'll report on that right
here
speaking of instagram stories though
we've got far too much space news to
cover in
this video that at least anybody could
cope with editing whilst trying to also
do
research so over there i'm going to be
talking about how the mars lander
insight has finally got its mole its
temperature probe
buried in the ground after a couple
months of trying and also how the first
exoplanet has been discovered using
radio waves which is a really big deal
so those will go up just after this
video
post and i will save them in a highlight
on my profile
so that you can also check them out
whenever you're watching this
too but starting now with our first
piece of news and i want to talk about
the fact that we may have solved the
mystery
of what happened in a supernova that was
observed back
in 1987. so some of you might remember
it being reported in the news this
supernova that went off in 1987
in one of the milky way sort of little
companion satellite galaxy that orbits
around us called the large magellanic
cloud that we can see
from the southern hemisphere sky this
was dubbed supernova in 1987
a and it really was the first supernova
that modern astronomers were able to
study in great detail with
modern telescopes you know mod
technology and digital
detectors as well so previous supernova
has really been recorded on photographic
plates that
really you you're not able to record the
brightness of it
properly but with the digital detector
you can now after that sort of initial
bright burst of light of the supernova
had faded away you could see that
a star that used to be in that place in
the large magellanic cloud had in fact
disappeared it was a blue supergiant
star so that confirmed that that big
flash of light that we'd seen was
definitely a supernova
but astronomers have never been able to
find is the
leftover core of that star that went
super the remnant that it left
behind it a star of that size a blue
supergiant should have left behind a
neutron star that
we should have been able to spot with
radio waves or
x-rays or infrared because you know a
neutron star is still very hot after all
that supernova
has happened and so it's still radiating
heat and we should be able to spot it
but
even after you know decades of searching
with various different telescopes
including the hubble space telescope as
well
we've never been able to find anything
so it raised the question of whether did
this star actually form a neutron star
maybe it actually formed
a black hole maybe the star was bigger
than we thought and therefore would have
produced a black hole or maybe
uh the star collided with another star
and that's what's then triggered to
collapse down into a black hole
but then back in november 2019 a paper
came out from cygnus collaborators
showing that at the center of the
remnant of supernova 1987a
there was this sort of giant dust blob
glowing
in the sub millimeter wavelength range
so it's between sort of infrared and
microwaves in terms of wavelength now
this idea that dust could have been
blocking any remnant
that was left over had been raised
before because supernova
do produce a lot of dust you know they
produce a lot of heavy elements those
sort of come together to block a lot of
light
and so people had been searching for
this but had never really
seen it but the fact that this was sort
of glowing dust
suggested that okay there's something
inside this dust that is actually
heating it up and irradiating it and
causing it to glow suggesting that it
probably was a neutron star therefore
and not necessarily
a black hole the thing was the
brightness of the dust
they found was brighter than it would
have been expected given
how much energy a neutron star is
thought to radiate
now the authors of that paper were
observers people who use
telescopes and report back on what they
find and suggest the most
likely hypothesis but it needs the
theorists to step
in and explain well is this definitely
what we'd expect given our best models
of neutron stars and how they radiate
so that's what a group of theorists have
done this month they've released a paper
it's by paige and collaborators
and in it they've explained actually
that brightness that have been observed
is actually
expected for a neutron star of that age
so the models that the observers were
working with in the previous paper where
they said maybe it's brighter than
expected
was because you know they're based on
neutron stars that we've observed across
the galaxy that are
thousands if not millions of years old
and so a younger neutron star has much
more thermal energy
to radiate away and therefore the dust
can glow
that much brighter of course what you
need to do is still confirm this
hypothesis it's
technically still only based on theory
and so what you would want to do is take
a direct image of the remnant that is
there now the fact that they've detected
that there's dust there is kind of a
good thing because it means we now
okay expect that dust to sort of
dissipate and clear
over the next couple of decades maybe it
may be
in that time we will eventually be able
to take a direct image of whatever's
left and confirm whether it is indeed
a neutron star or not but that could be
in you know a couple of decades or a
couple of centuries right we just don't
know it's a bit of a waiting game
as with most things in astronomy but for
now i think we can comfortably say that
the most
likely thing that's at the center of the
supernova remnant of 1987a
is a neutron star next up we've got
another mystery that might be on its
way to being solved and that is the
mystery of fast radio bursts so these
are these incredibly energetic
incredibly short bursts you know
milliseconds or less little bursts of
radio waves from space and there's many
hypotheses to explain them but
none that's actually agreed on yet now
you might remember from my night sky
news back
in may that there was a fast radio burst
detected from
a magnetar in the milky way and that was
actually sort of the first
fast radio burst that was detected in
our own milky way rather than from
another galaxy
in the universe now magnetar is a type
of neutron star we're just talking about
neutron stars
with an incredibly strong magnetic field
so they're a little unstable and they
often sort of flare
these big bits of radiation and energy
now this month astronomers have sort of
been adding to the evidence pile
of sort of fast radio bursts explained
by magnetars with this paper that's been
published by maragetti and collaborators
who reported that they detected a
gamma-ray burst using the
integral telescope which is a space
telescope that's designed to detect
these gamma-ray bursts for whatever they
happen
in the sky and simultaneously
the chime telescope in canada also then
detected
these fast radio bursts and they know
that both the gamma-ray burst and the
fast radio burst came
from this known magnetar in the milky
way so this is exciting for
two reasons first of all it's the first
time that a radio counterpart has been
found
to a gamma-ray burst which were also
sort of a bit of an unsolved mystery a
decade or so ago as well
and it's very compelling evidence for
fast radio bursts
being powered by magnetars so you know
we're just
we're solving all the mysteries this
month now finally something really cool
to end on a
direct image of two exoplanets around a
star just like our sun
has been published by bonn and
collaborators
now we've imaged exoplanets directly
before the first being formal b
imaged by the hubble space telescope in
and since then we've imaged you know 22
more exoplanets around different stars
in the milky way so you might be asking
well what's special about this result
well it is two exoplanets around the
same star and that's never been done
before you know you've never seen sort
of like
two planets in the same system and been
able to take
an image of that so what the authors did
here is they used something called a
coronagraph now this is traditionally
used to block the light from the sun and
image the corona the sun sort of
extended atmosphere hence
the name you're essentially sort of
making an artificial solar eclipse with
your telescope to do this
and the same technique can be used to
image other stars too
to sort of spot the reflected light from
objects orbiting
around them so that's what these authors
did here with this star tyc
8998 761
thrilling name as part of a survey using
the very large telescope the vlt
in chile which is targeting over 70 sun
like stars in this way and trying to
take direct images of
any planets that might be orbiting them
the star they've looked at in this
research paper is
relatively nearby too as it's only 300
light years away right there's an
astronomical
stone's throw practically and you do
need stars that are close by to do this
technique of direct imaging to actually
be able to
collect enough light from reflected off
a planet right
it's very faint what you're trying to
detect
now although this star is very similar
to the sun in size
about 95 of the the size of the sun
it's only about 17 million years old
compare that with the sun's 4.5
billion years old right so the sun is
sort of you know halfway through its
lifetime so if we sort of say the sun is
middle-aged and the sun is
you know if the sun was 45 years old
this star would be
two months old right just to put it into
context it's a very
young star and a very young system in
comparison
and so what the authors have found was
two massive
planets around this star one six times
the mass of jupiter
and won 14 times the mass of jupiter
they orbit much further out though than
anything in the solar system so they
orbit 160 and
320 times further away
than the earth orbits the sun just for
context on that like pluto
on average is about 40 times further
away than the sun than earth is
so this is you know incredible distances
that are there away from their star
in this incredibly young system that's
just formed 17
million years ago and it's exciting to
think what this could tell us about
how sun-like stars form and how the
planets around sun-like stars form
as well so really interesting system to
consider and i wanted to know more about
it
from the authors themselves so i called
up the phd student from leiden
university who led this work alexander
bonn
to ask him all about it so people always
love like the human side
of science right so is there a story
behind
you know you finding this exciting
system
indeed there is we found this planet and
we're very excited about it and wanted
to
characterize it in more detail so what
we did
we took measurements in several
wavelength in the infrared light
and those wavelength measurements
actually showed another interesting
source around this target
so as you can see here when going to
longer wavelength which is
indicated by going from blue to the red
you
can see that there's another source
popping up in the lower right corner
of the image and this was extremely
exciting because this
is exactly what you expect a even lower
mass or lower effective temperature
object to look like
that it is not visible in the blue part
of the spectrum
and pops up in the red part so we were
extremely excited about this
additional planet candidate around this
young
sun but we didn't have the data to
confirm it at this stage
and that is why we had to take another
measurement
which led to the confirmation just a few
weeks ago and the announcement of the
first
directly imaged multi-planet system
around this young
solar analog so that must have felt
amazing when that image
came through right were you like waiting
for it like
exactly it was basically like this so we
had the data i showed you collected in
2019 and i was pretty certain
that this second planet is real because
there were other sources in the image
that would look different and
they looked like i would expect a
background star to look like
and this was the only source showing
this behavior so i was pretty certain
this is probably a second planet to the
system
and yeah in astronomy you know it you
apply for observing time and then you
wait
until the observations get carried out
and it took almost another year
for the observations to be carried out
so this february
in 2020 february we
got or we we got the announcement that
the observations were carried out the
night
before and i was super excited when i
read this email in the morning
and i just went to my computer
downloaded all the data i did all the
data reduction
and i i couldn't wait it to finish
and when i saw the final image i was
super relieved because it looked exactly
or it confirmed exactly what we expected
and yeah i was super excited i ran to my
supervisor and he was also
relieved to to see the planet staying at
the same position
and confirming this very exciting
discovery so
yeah this was my february 16th i think
2020 and afterwards i i
sat down to to write on the news and the
paper and
also this is like a this is a lockdown
paper right it's like a quarantine paper
that you've written
yeah it was a nice piece of work to do
during quarantine
i think i i submitted it in april so it
was basically really like the the
hardcore
first month of quarantine i i was able
to do all the data reduction
analysis from home and yeah so so
exactly this is a piece of quarantine
work and yeah i'm happy that it worked
out that well
nice i'm glad something came out of
quarantine so now you've found this
first system that's been an image of two
planets in it is this
something you'd like to observe again
you know you talked about getting
follow-up observations on it but it is
is it something now you've confirmed
that there are two planets there that
there could be some more data that you
can get on it
perhaps everyone talks about the james
webb space telescope with exoplanet
yes absolutely so the story doesn't stop
here just because we found the two
planets it just raises more
very interesting questions and one of
those questions is
how did those planets get there where we
found them because
it is remarkable how far they are away
from their star this
is of course challenging for planet
formation theories and we we have to ask
ourselves
how did the planets get to these
positions so
in in general there are two pathways
that can lead to planets at the position
that far away from the star
one idea is that the planets formed at
the very position where they are right
now
or the planets formed closer to the star
and migrated outwards after their
formation
so what we have to discern now is which
of those formation mechanisms makes more
sense
in this case here and from this very
system we can learn a lot
because we have two planets and these
planets can interact dynamically
with with each other and basically there
are two
ways to test this hypothesis first one
is we can test it from a dynamical point
of view
so we continue observing this system and
we monitor the relative positions of the
planets with respect to the star
and this allows us to constrain the
orbital parameters how the planets move
around the star
and from the orbits we can infer
how the planets got there if there was
some migration or if they actually were
born at those places
the only caveat here is the planets are
pretty far away from the star
and this comes along with very long
orbital periods and to actually say
something about the orbits of the
planets
we have to observe them for several
years at least to to have at
some statistical significance con
the orbital parameters constrained so
the more appealing way because it is
probably the quicker
approach to to actually say something
about the formation of the planets
is to to spectral spectroscopically
analyze their atmospheres
and this is where james webb is probably
a key player
because james webb can do spectroscopy
into the far mid or into the mid
infrared and
exactly by by analyzing and studying the
atmosphere studying the elements that
are present in the atmospheres
we can say something whether they
actually formed
outside or formed closer to the star and
i love that your background is
is paranal right it's the residencia
where you sort of stay when you go
observing and is that the vlt behind you
as well you can see
yes exactly this is exactly what you see
behind me so
to the right on the hill you can see the
very large telescope maybe
in the background which is composed of
four big
eight meter telescopes and exactly to
the left there's the residencia where
you stay as an astronomer when you are
observing with a vlt
and you might know it actually from a
james bond movie
which uh appeared i don't know exactly
what
yeah but one of the late like newer
james bond movies
where it actually blew up but it's still
there and you can live there and it's
a pretty amazing place to stay in the
desert and
i went there for an observing trip in
and i spent three days on top of the
hill
the bad news was in the night i i
planned to observe
actually there was bad weather and a lot
of clouds so i couldn't do my observing
run
but at least i was at this very deserted
place in the middle of the atacama
desert and it was an amazing trip anyway
and uh yeah i could see the big
telescopes i usually work with and
i could see how the data was produced
even though
no data was produced in the night i was
supposed to observe which was a bit
unfortunate but
maybe i will be more lucky next time no
it's just so ironic isn't it you just
fly all the way to chile and you care
about weather
nightmare yeah yeah it's it's an
astronomer's nightmare and i hope it's
not my bad luck i bring with me but
i i i hope for better weather and clear
skies next time
yeah well fingers crossed for you thanks
so much alexander for talking to me it's
been great
thank you very much now if there's
anything i've talked about
in this month's night sky news video
that maybe you didn't understand
fully or you want to learn more about or
get just get more detail on
then i have just the thing for you
because this week's video sponsor
is the great courses plus this is an
on-demand
video learning service but get this all
the courses are taught by top professors
from like the best universities around
the world
or like experts from places like the
smithsonian museum or national
geographic
for example you might want to know more
about supernova after we talked about
supernova 1987a
in this video so you could check out
this lecture course on the life and
death of stars from professor statson at
vanderbilt university
i recognized his name immediately
because i've definitely cited his
research papers before
in my own research and he has this whole
lecture series on the life of stars that
you can watch at your own pace
anytime anywhere i've been using the
great courses plus to learn more about
marine biology which is one of my
passions outside of astronomy
because with a subscription you get
access to a library of eleven thousand
video lectures about science maths
history cooking or look
even singing those who stick around for
the bloopers know that i should probably
take that course
if that sounds like it's up your street
then the great courses plus is offering
my subscribers a
free trial so if you want to support me
and my channel by subscribing then go to
thegreatcoursesplus.com
forward slash dr becky that's
d-r-b-e-c-k-y
or click the link in the description and
start your free trial
today thanks great courses plus and now
we're all the embarrassing bloopers and
you know now you'll know which direction
to sort of just
wave towards towards all the ladders on
mars
eating my own hair i tied you up for a
reason
um the mars lander insight how it's
managed to finally get its mole
it's a little temperature buried buried
in the ground
probe mole it's little temperature probe
fully buried in the martian soul after
seoul martian soil after months of
trying
august slipped away like a bottle of
wine
wish organs slipped away like a bottle
right at the minute slipping away and
all of the sweat that everyone across
the uk is producing in this heatwave
now we've imaged exoplanets before
including the first one which was form
hole
b form it's another word i never say out
loud formal holt
for fomalhaut thermal hout
formal i wasn't putting r in it why am i
so bad at pronouncing things
every week there's something i can't
pronounce that everyone's correcting me
on in the comments
mysterious fbs are you caused by
magnetons
i have never in all my life
been so relieved to finish filming
before i can
open the doors in this room and
open the windows it is
so hot